All right.
Can we bring them in? Are they all online?
Okay. I thought I saw some people live streaming.
There's a couple out the back
Says recording.
Good morning everybody. I hope you're well.
Uh, very good to have you here to talk on the notice
of motion to approve the misuse of drugs order, uh,
which is currently with the health committee.
Um, we last week invited ministry officials, uh,
to provide evidence to the committee,
so very good to have you here.
Um, we will, we've got you for 15 minutes to hear evidence,
so, um, and to answer questions that members may have, I'll,
I'll hand that over to you for some opening remarks
and then, um,
I'll allow members the opportunity to ask questions.
Thank you.
Um,
We've got some audio challenges here.
I'm sorry. Um, we can't hear you.
Are you able to hear us now?
We can, but it seems like, are there a couple
of you in the same room with the,
Yeah, so have we sorted
that now? Is that, is that better?
There we go. We're good. Yeah,
Sorry about that.
Um, as I said, my name's Tanya Jones.
I am, um, from saf Ministry of Health.
Um, I'm here, as you said, to talk to, um, the misuse
of drugs, classification
and supply order for, um, 2025, um, for your,
which has been presented to you for your consideration.
Uh, the order is required
to classify substances under the misuse of Drugs Act 1975.
Substances or controlled drugs in New Zealand are scheduled
under motor and categorizes either Class A, B,
or C, depending on the risk of harm they pose
to individuals in society
with Class A being the highest risk of harm.
The substances that are being recommended
for scheduling in this order are based on recommendations
that are made by the Expert Advisory Committee on drugs.
The A A CD is a statutory committee,
which is set up under the misuse of Drugs Act
to make recommendations to the Minister
of Health on drug classification issues.
The EACD is made up of a range of experts, which
who have relevant areas of expertise, such as pharmacology,
toxicology, drug
and alcohol treatment, psychology, community medicine,
as well as having experts in public health,
the app appropriateness and safety of pharmaceuticals
and their availability to the public, uh,
and from border control,
and also representatives from police ministry for justice,
and also a person who represents the views of consumers
and drug treatment services.
DACD consider a range
of aspects when considering substances such
as the likelihood or evidence of abuse, prevalence, levels
of consumption, seizure trends,
and potential appeal of vulnerable populations,
specific effects such as, uh, pharmacological, psychoactive,
and toxicological effects, risk to public health,
any therapeutic value potential to cause death,
and the ability to create dependence,
international classification and experience.
This order includes recommendations on the classification
of 22 individual substances, specifically three,
fentanyl analogs as Class A controlled drugs usually
to very high risk of harm, three, synthetic cathinones
and five synthetic cannabinoids is Class B controlled drugs
due to a high risk of harm,
three other synthetic cannabinoids
and three benzodiazepines is Class C controlled drugs, um,
as they're considered to pose a moderate risk of harm.
In addition, five substances which you use in the
manufacturer of amphetamine
and methamphetamine, are being sh scheduled
as precursor substances.
And the order also takes the opportunity
to classify substances related to tramadol,
which is currently classified as a Class C substance.
The order is also sets the quantity at which they
presume to be for supply.
The proposed new classifications will also allow New Zealand
to meet international obligations as party
to several United Nations Drug conventions,
which have listed many of these substances.
Scheduling substances under motor provides police
and customs with powers to disrupt supply.
It's not aimed at in criminalizing individual users.
These substances have been considered has,
there has been an increase in prevalence
and misuse of these substances in domestic and
or international jurisdictions.
None of these substances included in this order
are used therapeutically.
Uh, but should that change,
there is a mechanism under the act for doctors
to prescribe these for their patients.
When we veed this paper
and we consulted with a range of stakeholders, um,
including custom service, police, police,
national Drug Intelligence Bureau, department
of Corrections, ministry of Justice, um, a SR,
relevant health practitioners, professional bodies, um,
and also, um, psychoactive substance license holders
and the community based organizations.
Know your staff New Zealand and New Zealand Drug Foundation.
Following receipt of the select committee report,
the house agreed to the order, a commencement order.
We prepare to bring the order and council, thank you.
Thank you members. Do you have questions?
The, um, Dr. Be select
Committee tool is down.
Uh, do you need swap that? Is that helpful?
Oh, that's very kind. Thank you,
Kiara. Thank you.
Um, wanting to explore with you, you know,
the fact that we're, we're at a point again
where we're adding, uh, a list of drugs to motor, uh,
but we continue to see this punitive approach to, uh,
drug use and actually, you know, the harm that it causes
to individuals in whanau.
Um, what are your thoughts in terms of the way
that we could reform, uh, the motor
to be more responsive in terms
of taking a health-based approach instead
of the punitive approach that we currently have?
I'll just jump in here. I, I mean,
we've got a short hearing with them,
and I want it to sort of, like, this is more of a,
that's more of a general question, and I,
I can can ask them about Ang as well.
We we're trying to be specific
to this order in this case.
Thanks, Mr.
Chair. Uh, the, um,
substances listed in appendix two, uh, how,
why are they being reclassified, uh, class?
Are, are these being classified for the first time, uh,
because of a new awareness about these, um, substances?
Or are they being reclassified?
Some of the substances are already captured under the
misuse of drugs act, um, due to the fact
that they're substantially similar to, um, substances that,
um, are specifically named in the, in the act.
Um, but due to their, um, their risk of,
they only get scheduled as, um, as analogs,
which means there are only limited controls on them.
So by naming them specifically in the act, um, we can
increase schedule them at an appropriate level of,
um, of control. For the risk of
This is because C seven is kind of a catchall.
So if I invent a substance called
A-D-B-F-U-B-I-N-A-C-A, uh, that, um,
new would be just caught in C seven automatically.
Correct. And then, um,
Yes, Officials have had a time to consider this, uh,
and it has, um,
and it's been recommended
that it goes into Class D one instead.
That's right. So if it's a, if it's considered to be
structurally substantially similar to a already scheduled
substance, um, it is, you're correct.
It is automatically scheduled in C seven.
Um, and is, and C seven substances are considered to be
of a moderate risk of harm.
So, um, the EACD has looked at this
and considered that with all the information
that they have considered in terms of risk of harm, um,
that it actually poses a higher risk of harm, and so
therefore, um, should be scheduled more,
more would more appropriately be scheduled in Class B, um,
to reflect that it has a higher risk of harm
And, um, synthetic cannabinoids, what is the harm
that they cause that, um, means
that they're in B and what else in B one
and what else is, all right.
No, you've got the harm there. What else is in B one?
Uh, B one substances would
include, uh,
Just misuse.
We are just looking at B one to, um, advise
what other types of substances are in B one.
Um, sorry, I just have to bring up the misuse of drugs.
That's okay. And maybe while you're doing that,
I'll just ask some of your colleagues
who aren't looking up online, the benzodiazepines,
we've got, I guess, what are new sorts of benzodiazepines,
but is that, are the rest of them under in Class C already?
And so we're just keeping them in a
different part of Class C?
Uh, the benzodiazepines are C five controlled drugs.
Um, I believe there's only one benzodiazepine,
which isn't a C five.
Um, so the, so these ones you write are novel
benzodiazepines, they're not therapeutic.
Um, but to be consistent due to the risk of harm, um,
they are being considered to, to put into C five to align
with all the other benzodiazepines.
So I imagine, um, some
of my colleagues might be concerned if new policy decisions
were being taken through this classification.
Right. And that's, that's why I'm asking these questions.
So it appears to me this change is putting, um, is,
is not a new policy decision that's putting
newly developed benzodiazepines with the other ones.
Um, and so if we can go back to the question about the
synthetic cannabinoids to understand if that's consistent
with the treatment of other synthetic OIDs please.
So, um, currently in Class B, one of the misuse
of drugs act, we generally have processed substances
including opioids, um, who, which are used
for both therapeutic and abuse potential, including morphine
as well as other cannabis pre preparations. Um, so
You say B one, did I, did I hear you correctly?
Currently, B one includes morphine and synthetic cannabis.
Um, sorry, sorry.
I don't have the misuse of drugs act with me presently,
so I'm just, I'm having to, um, navigate.
Are you surprised? Um, morphines in Class B?
It wouldn't have been my guess,
but there are more harmful things than morphine. I,
I thought the same when I read through it last week.
Yeah. So, um, Indeed morphine is included under B one.
Um, we have fentanyl, we have hopium, we have, um, cannabis
amphetamines, um, other cannabinoids.
So the range.
Yeah, the other synthetic ca cannabinoids are,
and B one Okay.
Fentanyl, but synthetics to clasp, uh, a
Yeah, fentanyl only the analogs.
Just the analogs Because
'cause fentanyl is already class A.
Right? And we're only putting new analogs. Yeah.
Um, so, uh,
yeah, as, as I said, this sounds like, um,
uh, routine classifications of
correct few substances.
Can, can I ask a, um, dumb question?
What's, what's I get the A, B, C? What's the one to seven?
Like what, so I get what,
like I can see like it's got levels of harm for A, B and C,
but how do you class it in that numer, the numeral
after the letter? What does it mean? You
Mean the C two C? Yeah.
C two. What's the two
Mean? The C raise? Yeah.
There are different, um, parts of each, of each schedule.
So, um, so class, so schedule one is class A,
but there are, it's just class A.
Um, we have schedules B one, two, and three,
and then C one to seven.
Um, Natalie, are you able to, um, advise on the differences
between the individual numbers?
So, I mean, in, perhaps won't run through exactly
what they mean, but it just does it,
Does it, does it matter? It doesn't matter.
I was hoping for just a quick answer.
It's, it's a slight, it just means there are slightly more
penalties or more restrictions or controls.
Um, obviously the higher up, so C one,
there are more controls than there are in C seven or C five,
and it's the same in B, so it just allows
for a little bit more specification within the,
within those classes.
So I, I think, as Dr.
Vel said, it's a, it looks like a pretty standard
classification order.
So, um, that's good.
That's, and, and thank you for, for making
that presentation too.
Uh, the committee today, I think staff at next stage will be
to draw up a report on my JU to mm-hmm.
Consider that further from there. Excellent.
Thank you very much. Good to have you here.
Appreciate your comments. Thank you. Thank
You.
Chat about it. Thank you for that.
The nature of the beast here.
Hello, Hamish.
Hello. How's it going? Good, thank you, Lisa.
Thank you. You on my petitions committee? Yes.
I pop up all over the place.
Thank you. Thank you.
All right. We have you here for, for 10 minutes. Um,
So did you say 14?
'cause I'd like to take those, the extra four if I could.
10 minutes. 10 minutes,
but can always be generous if it's going well.
Um, no, no, no, no. It's good. I won't talk anymore.
I'll hand it over to you. Welcome to the health committee
for talking on this very important matter.
I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, good morning everyone.
My name is Broda Smith.
Um, we've got Mickey Bazant beside me, uh, my heavy hitter
and also Sola Freeman, who's come in to support.
Um, we are here to talk to you today about, um, menopause
and the health impact that that has for women at midwife.
Um, mine's a personal story.
I've come from someone who had to leave work, uh, um,
almost lost my marriage, almost
was considering what my life might be if I wasn't here.
Um, so I've had a fundamental impact on my life.
Um, I've, uh, when I left work, I had
to spend six months putting myself back together.
Um, it was a pretty tough time,
and I was lucky in the fact that my GP said to me,
I don't know enough anymore, I can't help you anymore.
Um, and I had to go
and pay $300 to see my GP men menopause specialist,
who basically with a therapist put me back together.
Um, and mine isn't an uncommon story.
Um, I've, I am actually part of a menopause support group.
Uh, I'm one of the administrators.
There's 17,000, um, members of
that which is in menopause support New Zealand on Facebook.
And my story is quite common, um, which is, which is really
disconcerting for women in their, you know, forties,
fifties are in a space where they've
quite often hit the c you know, the C-suite.
They've become a chief executive
or an executive of some sort,
and they're in that space
where they actually become almost non-productive.
And really, for me, that's, um, that's preventable.
It's, it's a,
and as, uh, Nikki says to me, prevention is not sexy.
Um, we'd like to make it sexy
because I think it has such long term
ramifications on the health system.
Um, and that's what Nikki's gonna talk to, is around the,
um, ramifications on the health system, that
that's a preventable process.
And, you know, the low hanging fruit
that we are gonna talk about today,
and it's not a lot of money, um, stops a lot
of issues down the track.
And so I think that's where if the health select committee
can look at the prevention side of what we're trying to,
what we're trying to achieve, then, um, you know,
the aged care costs of women, um, on later life,
plus the ability to continue to work, continue
to be a productive member of society, stay married, um, all
of those things is really important.
Um, so I'm gonna hand over to Nikki,
'cause she's gonna give you some stats and figures.
Nikki's a a journalist, um, in the science space
and has written two books on menopause or midlife.
So, um, I'll let you,
and then I'm gonna finish off at the end, so,
Okay. Um,
so we are asking you to consider a couple
of things which we've outlined in the
paper that we've just given you.
Uh, investing in funding for menopause education for GPS
and midlife health checks
and in menopause info pack for women.
So, menopause is a whole body and mind transition,
and a hundred percent of people
with ovaries is gonna go through it.
So that includes trans and non-binary people,
but mostly it's women, whether or not they have symptoms.
Menopause is going to affect all of those women's health.
So we need support through the menopause transition,
and we need consistency of care.
And it's really important to understand the impact
of not having that most women are gonna live a third
or a half of their life in a post-menopausal state.
And menopause has significant impacts on our
whole health as we age.
It's not just about reproductive health.
So it's emerging that midlife is a critical health
window for women.
And there are some examples which have
detailed in this report.
Uh, one is bone health. So one in three women is gonna
suffer an osteoporosis fracture, which I'm sure you know,
costs the health system hundreds of millions of dollars
and is responsible for 190,000 hospital beds
days annually.
There's a lot that we can do to prevent that with lifestyle
and other health interventions, and that includes menopause
or hormone therapy and midlife.
Heart health is another area.
Heart disease is the number one killer of women currently
around one in eight health dollars.
Again, I'm sure you know, this is spent on health,
on heart disease and stroke.
Uh, and it's preventable again,
with intervention at midlife.
And there's a hormonal component there as well.
Women are twice as likely as men to suffer from dementia,
and that's estimated, that's growing as you know,
and estimated to cost the health system, you know, close
to $6 billion by 2050.
The changes that are the precursors to dementia start
to happen inside the brain decades
before they become evident.
And that is in midlife,
and it's emerging in the evidence again here,
that there are things we can do in midlife to lower the risk
of developing dementia down the track as well.
So a health check
and interventions, if they're needed in midlife,
aimed at prevention, is gonna pay off later on.
Uh, and better health for those women, better quality
of life, uh, better earnings, better retirements,
and less burden on the health system
and the economy later,
it's gonna make those women's lives better
and it's gonna save the health system money.
The average age of a GP in, in New Zealand is 53,
and most of those gps didn't get any education on, uh,
it's not their, it's not their fault, it's just how it is.
But if they have that education now,
they've had to seek it out.
And so there's a gap there.
There's inconsistency amongst the care
that women get when they show up at their GP needing help.
So we need that funding for GP education,
and we need that midlife health check
or pac, it could be modeled on what's going on in Australia.
There's a midlife health check there.
Uh, if we intervene now
and identify the issues, now we can empower women
with the tools that we need to live a vibrant
and healthy second half of our life.
And thinking of bigger picture, we have a gender pay gap,
we have a retirement savings gap,
and we can't dismiss the impact
that menopause has on those things as well.
Uh, not being supported
through this life stage can impact that.
Our generation's gonna be living longer
and working longer than any before us.
And so we are urging you today to consider this
as an investment in the health in
women's futures and their health.
Got it. Thank you very much.
I'll open it up to members. Sorry,
I've just one last little bit to say.
Um, there is on the back page of the, um,
the handout a a quote that I've taken out
of the support group, which was posted last week.
And it's about a lady who had been asking for, um,
hormone replacement therapy HT for two years.
She lifted a box and fractured her back,
and it's turned out that she's got osteoporosis.
Now, those two years of not being on HRT has probably
created a lifetime for her now of issues.
My mum has got osteoporosis.
I've been very fortunate that I've, I've known about that.
So I've gone and got some, um, bone density scans
to understand, to have a baseline,
but that's just one story.
The inconsistencies that's comes
through in the support group of, of gps not understanding
what hormone replacement is.
Not thinking that hot flushes is the only symptom
that you have, not understanding
that it happens before your fifties.
These people of, you know, 45 to 55 is the average onset
of perimenopause.
So that inconsistency is something that we just, you know,
we really need to help doctors understand
and give them the education that they need
and the support to women
and the knowledge to women so that they can also advocate
for their own health outcomes.
And that's it. Thank you.
Thank you, Dr. Vera.
Thank you so much for this really important submission.
I recall when we consulted on the women's health strategy,
a very common experience
of women feeling not heard in the health system
for a variety of reasons.
And, and menopause would be one
where I note your concerns about, uh, uh,
widely shared about, um, uh,
not having symptoms taken, taken seriously.
I want to ask you about another point you made about
economic participation.
It's also well documented
and subject of a report by the New Zealand Institute
of E economists showing the massive productivity, uh, lost
to the country because we're not using midlife women's, um,
uh, skills as well as we could do, could be.
Can you help me understand what you'd like done
about, about that problem?
How could workforces keep skilled midlife women, uh,
um, uh,
and, uh, unemployment, uh, better, uh,
and also be accommodating
of them when they run into situations
where their employment's interrupted?
Yeah, so as part of the petition,
I had three aspects to that.
One was about workplace understanding and policies.
Um, my, you know, my nirvana in that space is
that MB provide policies
and, um, um, education to businesses
for them to be able to understand.
And there's a lot of, uh,
we're getting off topic here a little bit, knowing
that this is the health select committee,
but, um, there's quite a
few companies that are doing that already.
But the, the bigger companies, you know, the IAGs, the,
um, AZs of the world.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and that's not where most
of our employment is in New Zealand.
It's the smaller companies, you know, the 15 employees, the,
the, um, SMEs that are, are the ones
that probably can't get to that.
I asked as part of mine, I asked for a nine day fortnight,
um, that was declined.
I really wanted that one day just
to be able to sleep in, in the morning.
'cause I, my sleep was awful.
And I think that that understanding of
how significant the effects can be for employers, um,
is, is really important
Cost.
Yes. Um, thank you for your submission.
I think this is one of the very important topic.
Um, based on your understanding, what is the difference
between New Zealand, the strategies wise or, or,
or the way we approach this,
this transition period compared to the rest of the world?
Well, I can answer that just, um,
so Australia in particular is leading the way,
and I think we, we, I know we have probably a bit
of chip on our shoulder about Australia and,
and we probably need to step up a little bit here.
Mm-hmm. So in particular the, um, health select committee,
uh, where they had a senate inquiry
and that created, um,
about over $700,000 going into women's midlife health.
They've just identified that they are going to put aside,
um, specific, uh, doctor's appointments each year
for women that are geared specifically towards menopause.
Now, when
and when it comes to the workplace situation, yes,
workplaces need to do something,
but actually it's the health of women.
That's the key issue. If women's health is identified
and sorted and looked
after, then their ability to be in the workplace is going
to be so that much better.
Does that make sense? Mm-hmm.
So in the sense that the UK's doing better, um,
Australia's doing better.
A lot of this is low hanging fruit.
It is not hard for us to catch up,
But how about the waste of the world, for example, a lot
of Asian country, because it's for, for my,
for my knowledge, it seems like in a lot of Asian country,
they have, uh, a better approach
or even better supplement for women to go through those, um,
transition period as well.
Yeah. So we've got a friend of ours who works, um,
primarily in, um, the Asian space, um, mainly in Malaysia.
Uh, it's, it's probably a, a bit of a, it's even more
of a taboo subject in, in the Asian countries
that, from her understanding.
Um, so that's as much about trying to get women to talk
and actually go forward
and ask their doctors for, for that, um, for those options.
Mm-hmm. Probably is the point, the, the
where they are at from a medical point
of view, we are uncertain.
Um, but if you look at Australia and, and quite a, um,
and what Bri, the Britain is doing as well at the moment,
they are definitely a step forward, um,
and what they're offering to, to women in this
as a transition process.
So do you think that in the current market,
do we have enough, oh, sorry, sorry, sorry.
She, um, just, um, based on the current market,
do you think we've got enough, um, supplement or,
or different things for like,
because I know they, in other, other Asian country,
they do have a lot of products to, to try to help us, uh,
help the women to adjust their hormones level, or, or go,
Well, are you talking about natural health supplements?
There's a lot, like, it's not just like, you know,
the different, including health natural supplements as well,
but also I think for me it's just more like on,
based on our western medicine strategies, is is
that the right approach to, to target or improve the gold?
The gold standard is menopausal hormone replacement
therapy, so MHG.
Okay. That's the gold standard treatment.
Okay. We're gonna, we're gonna
Johanna and then we'll close.
So thank you for, for presenting today.
I was just, um, looking up our GP training
and the curriculum that they undertake, uh, as a part
of their professional development,
and they have a unit called Women's Health, um,
of which I saw they spend about 10% of that time
are looking at, you know, the as women age, um,
there's a big focus on when we are younger and youth health
and as, um, perhaps it is about,
maybe, you know, aging well, uh, is something
that could have a bit more focus in terms of, um,
thinking GP because they are frontline.
But, um, do you have thoughts around also the way
that nurses can be a part of that conversation
and be trained to be a part of that front door
to initiate conversations and build their capacity
and capability alongside our gps?
Absolutely. Um, we've know that a lot
of practices now have practicing nurses, um, you know,
that can prescribe
and the, um, a lot
of them are becoming menopause
specialists in their own right.
So it doesn't have to be just gps,
but that's the, um, we need to start somewhere.
And if we can, if we can get to the stage where
gps have a good education level and,
and resources that can be used across the gp, um, practices,
then I think that becomes, you know, becomes a,
a bigger, a bigger opportunity. Thank
You. Um,
it was, it was really good presentation.
I think you raised a number of, of excellent points.
Um, thank you as well for coming to Parliament a couple
of months back and presenting them not just a, a
for phase presentation.
Very touching. Um, there's work to do here.
You got, you actually got an extra five minutes.
Thank you. Oh, there you go. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it. You'll, you'll be hearing from us. Thank you.
Cheers very much
Mr. Allen. Very good
to have you here.
Thank you for coming in person to present your petition.
Thank you. Uh, we have you here for 10 minutes.
Uh, if you wanna leave some time for members, ask questions.
Sure. You may. I'll hand that time to you now.
Welcome to the health committee. Thank you very much.
Uh, good morning chair members
of the Health Select Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to speak in front of you today
regarding the critical state of the Health
and Disability Commissioner's office.
You'll have received my written submission,
and I hope, I hope you've had the chance to review it today.
I wanted to highlight the most pressing issues
and underscore why it's not just a periodic problem,
but a deeply human one impacting countless New Zealanders.
Today. I'm also speaking on behalf of my sister
who can't be here today, but is watching the live stream
from her home in Melbourne In January, 2022,
our mother, Anna Marie Lambs,
died from post ERCP Pancreatitis,
following a routine procedure at Middlemore Hospital,
I immediately filed complaints with the hospital
and the HTC seeking answers
and accountability while Middlemore swiftly completed their
investigation within a few months and recommended changes.
Our family has now been waiting
for answers from the HEC for over three years.
1,267 days to be exact.
Tragically, our father, who was equally, uh, desperate
for those answers passed away just four months later.
His determination to understand
what happened fuels my commitment to be here today.
Our family's prolonged wait is not an isolated incident.
It's a stark illustration of a systemic failure
that traps other families
and medical practitioners in similar distress.
The HCC is mandated to uphold patient rights
and ensure accountability,
however, it's fundamentally under-resourced, overwhelmed,
and operating with a severely compromised capacity.
Consider these facts mainly from the h many from the HCCs
own data and public statements.
In the 20 22 23 year,
the HT C received over 6,200 complaints.
My own OIA requests confirm the average investigation time
is blown out to 893 days
during a Health Select Committee meeting in May, 2020.
Um, in May, 2024, the HC commissioner herself revealed
that a vital $2 million funding request
to replace their antiquated Lotus Notes IT system was
declined by the previous government.
This is a system so outdated that it's mere mentioned,
elicited laughter from members of this very committee during
that meeting, a clear testament to
how demonstrably unfit it is for purpose.
I understand the HCC has now conducted an RFP to move
to Microsoft Dynamics,
but they've had to scramble
to find this budget from their existing
already strained operating costs.
Making matters worse, the HCC faces
significant financial blow.
The 2024 budgets were a $3 million funding cut.
This represented a 16.5% reduction to the overall budget.
While the recent 2025 budget documents do mention an
increased funding for the Health
and Disability Commissioner to improve complaint resolution
and care standards, and a one
of $1 million has been allocated specifically
to address the backlog.
This new funding does not come close
to offsetting the larger cut from the prior budget.
The gravity of these challenges is underscored
by the recent resignation of the Aged Care Commissioner,
who was asked of her early exit reflected frustrations
with the role or its associated resourcing.
She responded, and I quote, as you would expect,
I have to carefully answer that.
I think it's a challenge to BA balance the pure complaints
work under the legislation with the focus on prevention
and quality improvement for older people.
But it's not impossible.
It's just a challenge, and it's one that I've loved her.
Guarded by talent comments,
highlight the immense pressure on even the most senior
leadership within the HT C to balance the legislative duties
with limited resource.
A challenge that is evidently taking its toll on impacting
the HCCs ability to fulfill its prevention
and quality improvement mandate.
This brings me to a point of profound frustration, one
that highlights the core issue in the very same three years
I've been waiting for the HT C
to conclude its investigation.
I, as a private citizen, have personally initiated
and have achieved more tangible progress to advocating
for systemic changes within the very health system
that failed my mother and continues to fail other families.
This is included seeing new a RC procedural guidelines
implemented at MIDDLEMORE and A RCP audits introduced.
I'm now actively working directly with Health
and Zed to understand how these updated guidelines can be
rolled out nationally to all hospitals.
It is absurd that I have been able
to drive these crucial improvements while the HEC remains
stuck in slow processes.
I want to be clear that this is not a criticism
of the commissioner or her dedicated staff.
I understand they're making efforts
internally to approve efficiency.
However, as one senior member of the HEC staff told me,
these internal shifts, while positive are sufficient, are,
are insufficient given.
And I quote, the growing gap between the number
of complaints we receive
and the number we can close within the current resources.
My concern is with the broken system itself,
the chronic underfunding, the outdated tools
and the lack of political will
to properly empower this essential watchdog.
I'm calling our members of all parties
to take action rather than kicking the can down the road
for someone else to deal with.
This is not something that will score political points,
but it will make a difference to people's lives.
And surely that's what matters.
It's utterly embarrassing for the government
and the HCC that significant systemic,
systemic changes now depend on the efforts
of individual citizens.
What makes us even more egregious is that my ability
to affect these changes was heavily reliant on the extensive
network of contacts
and reputation that my mother built during her 30 years
of dedicated service to counties, Manco Health.
Most families navigating, excuse me,
most families navigating the HCC process,
they can't pick up the phone
and speak directly with the Chief medical Officer,
leaving them even more vulnerable
and powerless to advocate for essential change.
This underscores the fundamental inequity
of the current situation.
My concern over the H C's delays
and systemic issues also led me
to make a complaint to the Chief Ombudsman.
I understand that Mr. Allen has now completed his
investigation into the HCCs processes, including meeting
with the commissioner, and his opinion
is due to be released shortly.
I strongly urge all members of this committee
to review his opinion thoroughly once it's available.
What is particularly concerning
and what the Ombudsman office has previously flagged
is the HCS failure
to complete preliminary assessments within
a re reasonable time.
My experience directly exemplifies the very issue the,
the former Chief Ombudsman identified in a May, 2021 opinion
that the HCCs preliminary assessments were taken
between one year and nine months and three years
and nine months, a duration far beyond preliminary.
Indeed, it was not until earlier this year,
nearly three years into my complaint, that I was informed
that it was still in the information gathering phase.
This means my complaint has been stuck in this preliminary
stage for almost the entire problematic timeframe.
Mr. Bouchier previously criticized,
he explicitly recommended
that the HEC develop clearer guidelines
and address these very delays.
Yet here we are years later facing the exact same
issue, chair and members.
The HCC is the only recourse for patient patients
and families seeking answers and accountability.
Its current state of dysfunction is a profound
disservice to New Zealanders.
It prevents closure for families,
hinders learning within the medical professional profession,
and erodes public trust in our healthcare system.
My read submission outlines five key recommendations,
which I urge you to seriously consider.
While I've used my story as an example,
I'm here speaking on behalf of every New Zealander
who relies on the promise of a fair, timely,
and effective resolution.
When something goes wrong in our health system,
we cannot afford for the HCC to continue to fail families.
Thank you. I'm ready to answer any
questions. Thank you very much,
Dr.
Firstly, I'm sorry for you and your sister's loss,
and thank you for what is, uh, an incredibly
well written and well argued, uh, submission.
And I endorse, um, almost,
well, I endorse all of it.
Your analysis is entirely right about the situation.
Um, I want to, um, there,
there's a previous Ombudsman's report.
I'm not sure if it's a 20 21, 1 that points out that, um,
uh, the HDC can issue, um,
rulings that they're not going to, uh, take any further.
Mm-hmm. Action. Um, my concern, um,
unless your recommendations are adopted in total mm-hmm.
And funding is increased,
targets will only mean they'll just not investigate,
um, all the complaints.
So I agree with your recommendations,
but if only, um, if, if, uh,
if the funding remains constrained
and they only pick up on the, um, timeliness issue,
uh, that will be a problem.
This, this is a quasi-judicial bo bo mm-hmm. Body.
And therefore, um, uh, it is,
uh, there's, um, uh, making,
uh, requiring things
to happen more quickly, which we should.
Mm-hmm. Um, we don't want to set up the perverse situation
where, uh, where people don't get complaints investigated.
Yes. So yeah, I agree with your, your, as you've presented.
Thank you. Um, if I could make one comment there that the,
it was interesting in, in, um, January
or February of this year, the investigator that was assigned
to the case gave me a call and,
and asked me what I wanted to happen.
So it took three years for them to ask that one question,
and I gave him the answer, which then led to them, uh,
opening their formal investigation.
Um, but if they had answered
that question at the very beginning,
maybe things would've changed.
Maybe things would've been different.
It's just a simple question to ask,
but yet they don't seem to do that
until they've gathered all the information.
So how many, how many families are they putting
through unnecessary strain by not asking
that One simple question,
Thank you for yeah, an outstanding presentation.
It was really good. Well researched and
and echo the comments that Dr.
Rum had around very sorry for what your family has been
through, and I'm sure there are others
that are impacted as well like this.
Appreciate you coming here. Thank,
which is a briefing from arthritis.
Excuse me.
Good morning. Good morning.
Alright, so, um, we're in public session now.
Uh, welcome to the health committee.
Very good to have you here.
Um, we are here to speak on, um, a briefing
that we're doing, um, from Arthritis New Zealand,
and, uh, we have you here for 10 minutes to comment on that.
If you could leave members some time for questions
that would be appreciated, we will start that time now.
Thank you. Thank
You. Got a
call.
Sarah, I'm a rural doctor from Qar Hospital
and also have worked in general practice from time to time,
and I currently hold the position
of National Clinical Director for Primary Community Care
for Health New Zealand Water.
Um, just want to say thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
speak to, to the submission from Arthritis New Zealand
and to introduce my team, um, who I will ask
to introduce themselves as well.
But we have Peter go, Peter Gow,
who's a rheumatologist from counties, Monaco,
and Andrew Barry, who's our manager for pharmacy services
and our funding, funding
and outcome team at Health New Zealand.
I just also want to thank the people behind us,
including Dr.
Sue Ward who couldn't be here today.
She's Inre, um, who helped us prepare
and the rest of the team who helped us prepare for today.
Firstly, I want to acknowledge the submission
that was made from Arthritis New Zealand.
We welcome the work and the advocacy from them,
and I take it that this group has read the detail of
that submission, so we won't speak too
much to the detail there.
Important though that we understand the request for action
that News Health New Zealand view gout as a priority that
we set and deliver a target of 55%
of people being on a managed gout program by 2028.
And that Health New Zealand worked
to build awareness about causes and management of gout.
So thanking you for that.
And I'd just like to move on to Peter,
who's gonna talk a bit more about gout,
Uh, ki Koto.
My name name's Peter, go. I'm a semi-retired rheumatologist,
uh, clinical leader
and, uh, associate professor of medicine at counties, Manco,
and I'm also a member of the Clinical Governance Committee
of the National Hall Coalition, PHO.
I'm going to put the patients in the room
with a few quotes from our qualitative research patient.
One, when I do get gout,
there's a lot of throbbing in the area.
When it is really bad, it feels like the flesh is trying
to rip and going to burst my skin
because my skin is stretching too much.
Patient two, what does gout mean to me?
Well, back then, it meant a lot of pain, a lot
of time off work, which means a loss
of opportunity of income.
Patient three, I never heard of any allopurinol.
I never heard of any prevention treatment
or anything that they can use instead
of just when you get the attack, lay down until you're able
to see a doctor and get a prescription of Volta.
Gout, arthritis is common, cruel, crippling, and costly
and occurs when serum blood urate levels become high enough
that crystals form in the joints with severe inflammation
and severe pain.
New Zealand has some of the highest gout rates in the world,
particularly counties, Monaco, around 5.7%
of New Zealanders are affected,
but it's much higher in Pacific people at 14.8%
and Maori at 8.5%.
But gout is also curable if treated early with optimal doses
of Allopurinol or other urate lowering treatment
to reduce the level of serum urate, which is also known
as uric acid to a target level
of less than 0.36 million miles per liter.
A high prevalence of gout is found in Maori
and Pacific peoples, not because of what they eat or drink,
but because they have a genetic difference which reduces the
excretion of urate in the urine,
particularly when associated with obesity.
This means that there are higher levels
of serum urate in these populations,
and gout occurs at a younger age
with a great impact on their working life
and subsequent socioeconomic factors.
Pacific peoples in Maori are nine times
and five times more likely to be hospitalized
with gout compared to the European population.
Maori Pacific patients do not have
to give up things which are culturally important to them,
such as Ana when their serum ator is controlled,
and this can be used as a positive motivator
to encourage adherence.
I won't see it a Norwegian GP
and pathy tell a patient,
I can control your gout without you having to give up.
Being a Maori gout is associated in about one third
of patients with diabetes, kidney disease,
and cardiovascular problems.
And painful acute gout is often the first sign
that these asymptomatic diseases are present so
that they can be identified and treated.
These conditions can be more difficult to treat in patients
with uncontrolled gout
because anti-inflammatory drugs for acute gout, such
as volta can aggravate kidney disease
and cardiovascular disease,
and prednisone can make diabetes worse.
Uncontrolled gout is also associated with strokes,
excuse me, and premature death from cardiovascular disease.
Recent national data shows that
although Allopurinol was prescribed at least once
and 60% of patients with count,
only 44% are taking it regularly,
and only 5%
of patients are taking more than 300 milligrams daily.
A higher dose is often necessary
because half the patients on Allopurinol do not achieve
target urate levels.
Mm-hmm. The solution
to this undertreatment is the up titration
of Allopurinol guided by serum urate levels.
With recent studies showing the effectiveness
of pharmacists in this regard
and the systematic research review, both internationally
and in New Zealand, there are key elements which promote
success in current gout programs.
The stop gout program in Northland has an automated
prescription, which takes into account whether the patient
has kidney disease or diabetes with escalation of the dose.
Using free blister pack pharmacists provide education
and health support.
Workers or kayna provide community support
and encouragement to continue with the medication.
Urate levels can be checked at each visit
and the allopurinol dose increased if necessary.
The other program of which I was recently involved was the
county's gout buster program in which pharmacists had four
training sessions, including medical training
and cultural training by Pacific and Maori educators.
A critical feature of this program was the use
of electronic software, which enabled communication with gps
and notification of urate levels, as well
as providing text messages to patients
to provide encouragement and appointment reminders.
This program also included point of care testing
with finger prick for urate levels
and up titration according to standing orders from the gp.
In both of these programs in which 75%
of patients were either Maori
or Pacific fecals, the rate
of regular allopurinol uptake was around 70%.
Feedback from the patients in both programs was extremely
positive as it was from pharmacists
and the GPS who responded to the survey.
Other programs around New Zealand include elements
of the gout bus from stop gout programs,
which can be customized to local needs
when they are purinol reclassifications gazed trained
pharmacists will be able to dispense continuation of supply
for up to 12 months outstanding orders from the GP,
and will be able to form up titration required
to achieve the urate targets.
In summary, with appropriate multidisciplinary programs
focusing on the optimal use of Allopurinol
and other urate lowering therapy, the personal
and financial burden of gout will be considerably reduced,
particularly for predisposed Maori Pacific peoples
with increased opportunity for work
and recreation without pain
and better control of metabolic comorbidities.
Excellent. Thank you, Peter.
Um, thank you for the explanation of gout.
I'd like to ask my colleague, Andrew,
to speak a bit about the work that we've been doing recently
and I doing now, and perhaps what the next steps.
I'll just also mention
that we've got two minutes left to run in this hearing.
Thank you. Yeah. Cool. Is it, Mr.
Chair, will there be an opportunity
for questions? I would hope so,
And I'll ask Andrew.
Okay, thanks Sarah.
And, uh, just, uh, very quickly, um,
my name is Andrew Barry.
I'm a system design manager, pharmacy services,
and the primary care commissioning team, um,
health New Zealand planning, funding and outcomes.
Uh, and I'm a pharmacist.
Um, so I'll, I'll scoot through, um, very quickly
what we are doing currently in the next steps.
Um, firstly, uh,
health New Zealand is looking closely at arthritis.
New Zealand's recommendations.
Uh, gout was also identified as a priority in the 2023
Health New Zealand Pacific Health Strategy.
Uh, pharmacy led gout programs are expanding across the
Otaki region, um,
which will provide coverage in Taranaki Lakes,
Waikato Bay of Plenty.
And by October this year, uh,
our national clinical networks are working together on
heart, kidney, and metabolic disease pathways
with the potential for gout
to be integrated as part of that.
Uh, and, uh, earlier this year,
health pathways completed a national clinical pathway
for gout, um,
and a national webinar is planned for early next year
to support clinician education
and promote consistent, um, management approaches.
Uh, in terms of next steps, um, we are, uh, keen
to explore initiatives that align with arthritis New Zealand
to increase the uptake in effectiveness
of urate lowering therapies.
Um, that will include or,
or can include, um, how we better promote understanding
of gout and reduce the stigma, uh, by improving data
and IT systems so that care is more connected, uh,
and training and bringing in more pharmacists
to support people with gout.
Uh, and also creating a nationally consistent approach to
how gout services are designed and funded.
Um, which could include, uh, streamlining, claiming
and reporting systems, uh,
targeting commissioning in regions where smaller populations
or smaller number of people are affected by gout.
Uh, integration with long-term conditions, pathways
and, um, expansion
of the successful pharmacist led gout programs and,
and, um, uh, also sustainable funding for KAYNA
and community outreach roles.
Uh, and then just finally, um, an expert advisory group,
which is linked to the National Pharmacy agreement process
is scoping options for nationwide
extended pharmacy services.
And, um, that includes, um, uh, services such
as the gout management programs that are run pharmacies.
So, um, a, a whirlwind, um, summary
and I'll hand back to you, Sarah.
Thanks, Andrew. That, that's really all from me.
Just thank you to the team for that explanation. Thank
You. I
actually stand corrected.
I was looking at the agenda just here.
We've got a few more minutes.
Very, that means we can ask questions, which is,
which is where we wanna go.
So I saw Dr. Vel had her hand up.
Uh, thank you for that presentation. Mm-hmm.
Uh, can you explain, uh, the gap
between, uh, the need in the community
and these new services that are being developed?
I understand there's a lot underway,
but the, um, uh, presentation
that generated this hearing, um, pointed
to a large gap and unmet need.
Um, so rather than a description of the activity,
which sounds copious, is the activity sufficiently scaled
to meet, uh, what, you know, this important, um,
need for our community?
Yeah. Thank you for that question.
Um, I think the answer is multifactorial.
So the problem I was hoping
For, yes or no, We hope so.
How's that? Um, it's multifactorial
because a lot of the gap is to do with service delivery
and a lot of the gap is also to do
with the stigma associated with gout and, um, patients.
And, you know, I see people come in all the time who've had
multiple courses of anti-inflammatory medications
and have never really accessed when they've been well,
and the system hasn't been available for them
to access the allopurinol or urate lowering medicines.
So I'm, I'm really hopeful that by scaling these,
particularly across the, that we're doing right now,
that we will see this being more accessible
and more effective for more pizza.
Go to Usher again and I'll come stop. Stop. Okay.
Do you have a stop? Is No,
Just following up on The answer.
You're talking about people coming in
with anti-inflammatories.
Is is the problem under-diagnosis or undertreatment?
I can speak to that. It is under treatment
and I can also speak as to why things haven't progressed.
I've been doing these studies in primary care since 2002,
and often they're followed by, uh, 18 months
of a short term contract.
And then we have another fashion like CCM to a RI
to something else, and then we start all over again.
I think for the first time, I feel optimistic
that we now have several programs which are scalable,
Cam and, Um, we've had a lot of talk about treatment
and it's sort of written in your stars
that you're gonna get gout, but then now in the health, uh,
in the Arthritis New Zealand, um,
original submission talking about Health New Zealand should
be building awareness to the causes of gout.
What are the causes of gout? I haven't heard that.
Well, the main one is, is this genetic defect. Um, so it's
Written in the stars is what you're saying.
And the other thing is obesity is a, is a co-factor.
Um, the genetic factor interacts with, uh, um,
sugary drinks, and so that, that's another factor.
But I think the, the main cause is that, um, a lot
of health professionals are not aware of the need
for treatment and sufficient treatment
and, uh, it seems as though, uh,
for the causes treatment 300 milligrams as a ceiling
and people won't go below,
whereas the average in county should be around 400.
Sorry, what was that last figure you said?
Say that again. What was the last
Figure you quoted?
That the, the treatment level should be the dose
of allopurinol should be, uh, up around 400,
but only 5% of people are getting to that stage.
And, uh, international studies show that only 50%
of those people are going to reach the target.
So there's only about 20%
of people in the country are actually getting a dose
that prevents these crippling deformities
and damage to the joints. So
It's preventable and manageable.
Yeah. Is what you're saying. It's the right
treatment. Johana. Yeah.
I wanted to explore that because you've pointed out
that we may be under prescribing the right dosage for,
because I, I, I know a few people that suffer from gout
and, um, they sort of just take it for when they're sick
and then they stop, um, taking it as if, you know,
it's done now, but it's like the
pill you need to take it daily.
Um, it is it that we need some, you know, you've got your,
your different models.
In the far north example that we heard, um,
is it a matter of us now, you know,
seriously taking a look at, uh, funding these to scale
and rolling them out into other high needs
populations? Yeah.
Adherence is a very, uh, important issue in that.
Um, if Allopurinol is not used correctly, um,
it can make the gout worse if it's not given
with preventive treatment as well.
The other thing is people forget
or they're late in getting their, uh,
prescription within a week.
Urate levels will go back to what they were before.
And if you get started back again on 300 milligrams
of Allopurinol without an anti-inflammatory,
you get the worst attack you've ever had.
And the patient will say to me, with Voltarin,
I was better in five days
and now look what's happened to me with this Allopurinol.
We've got to train health professionals better on how
to manage and the, the health pathways
and the BA guidelines have got a very good, um,
sessions on gout there.
And can I stop on That? We're very, we're over time
Because this is a really interesting topic
and it it's huge in our communities.
Mm-hmm. Because I'm wondering about the community education,
health promotion component to prevent, educate
and provide healthy environments to,
and then the treatment component and training the workforce
'cause health, uh, k could be having this,
it's not just a clinical
discussion. Everyone should be trained in it.
Absolutely. And, and the gut programs do have kama
kina roles within them.
So they're, they're absolutely crucial in education
and de-stigmatizing
because people need to be able to talk about this
with their mates so
that they can talk about their treatment and how effective
It's the Pacific people are going to their churches
and doing some work in counties.
Man. And in the past I've, uh,
done a talkback session on Pacific Radio
and I think that perhaps we should be using
social media better.
Mm. All right, we're gonna wrap up soon.
I is hold onto this. Sure.
Thank you. Will gout be in Health New Zealand's health
plan so that this work gets the priority
and resourcing it deserves?
I don't have an answer to that question.
I'm sorry, but I can take it away and find out.
I hope so. You'll be pushing, you'll be Thank you.
You'll be pushing for it though, right?
Well of course we are clinicians. Oh, you got the packet
Of chippies. Hello.
Just bought some chips just in case you forgot.
Not, It's such a cheap prevention, isn't it?
Hey, thank you very much. Thank you very much for coming.
Thank opportunity. I do
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Have a great day. Thanks guys. Thank you.
Go back to private place.